PAGE 1
Accelerating Defect Predictions in Semiconductors Using
Graph Neural Networks
Md. Habibur Rahmana, Prince Gollapallib,c, Panayotis Manganarisa, Satyesh Kumar Y adavb,c,
Ghanshyam Pilaniad, Brian DeCoste , Kamal Choudharye, and Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodia*
Abstract
First principles computations reliably predict the energetics of point defects in semiconductors, but are constrained by the expense
of using large supercells and advanced levels of theory. Machine learning models trained on computational data, especially ones that
sufficiently encode defect coordination environments, can be used to accelerate defect predictions. Here, we develop a framework for the
prediction and screening of native defects and functional impurities in a chemical space of Group IV , III-V , and II-VI zinc blende (ZB)
semiconductors, powered by crystal Graph-based Neural Networks (GNNs) trained on high-throughput density functional theory (DFT)
data. Using an innovative approach of sampling partially optimized defect configurations from DFT calculations, we generate one of
the largest computational defect datasets to date, containing many types of vacancies, self-interstitials, anti-site substitutions, impurity
interstitials and substitutions, as well as some defect complexes. We applied three types of established GNN techniques, namely Crystal
Graph Convolutional Neural Network (CGCNN), Materials Graph Network (MEGNET), and Atomistic Line Graph Neural Network
(ALIGNN), to rigorously train models for predicting defect formation energy (DFE) in multiple charge states and chemical potential
conditions. We find that ALIGNN yields the best DFE predictions with root mean square errors around 0.3 eV , which represents a
prediction accuracy of 98 % given the range of values within the dataset, improving significantly on the state-of-the-art. We further show
that GNN-based defective structure optimization can take us close to DFT-optimized geometries at a fraction of the cost of full DFT.
The current models are based on the semi-local GGA-PBE functional, but are highly promising because of the correlation of computed
energetics and defect levels with higher levels of theory and experimental data, the accuracy and necessity of discovering novel metastable
and low energy defect structures at the PBE-level of theory before advanced methods could be applied, and the ability to train multi-fidelity
models in the future with new data from non-local functionals. The DFT-GNN models enable prediction and screening across thousands of
hypothetical defects based on both unoptimized and partially-optimized defective structures, helping identify electronically active defects
in technologically-important semiconductors.
1 Introduction
Semiconductors are critical for a variety of technologies
such as consumer electronics, healthcare and biotech-
nology , information technology , communication and
connectivity , automotive manufacturing, renewable energy ,
and industrial automation1. With the signing of the CHIPS
Act2, there has been a massive influx of funding into semi-
conductor R&D, resulting in the establishment of several
manufacturing facilities and research centers across the
United States as well as many global partnerships between
companies and universities. Developing next-generation
semiconductor materials is crucial for addressing global
a School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University , West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA;
E-mail: Corresponding author*— amannodi@purdue.edu
b Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Tech-
nology (IIT) Madras, Chennai 600036, India
c Centre for Atomistic Modelling and Materials Design, Indian Institute of Technol-
ogy (IIT) Madras, Chennai, 600036, India
d GE Research, Schenectady , NY, 12309, USA
e Materials Measurement Laboratory , National Institute of Standards and Technology ,
Gaithersburg, MD, 20899, USA
†Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available: https://github.com/
msehabibur/defect_GNN_gen_1 See DOI: 00.0000/00000000.
energy needs and the demands of the electronics indus-
try , and this process begins at the atomistic scale with
enhanced structure-property relationships that can scale
up to device performance and aid data-driven materials
design and improvement3.
The electronic structure of a semiconductor is heavily
dependent on the presence of point defects in its crystal lat-
tice, which range from intrinsic vacancies, self-interstitials,
and anti-site substitutions, to impurities at different lattice
sites4. Defects can introduce energy levels within the band
gap, affecting carrier concentration and mobility , and often
acting as traps that lead to non-radiative recombination of
holes and electrons in optoelectronic devices 5–10. Defects
also play a crucial role in dopant activation, diffusion, and
segregation, which are vital factors in device fabrication
processes. Even at low concentrations, unwanted point
defects or impurities can have a significant impact on the
electronic, optical, and transport properties of semiconduc-
tors, making it important to be able to accurately predict
their stability and electronic signatures11.
One of the applications where the effect of defects
1– | 1
PAGE 2
is felt most is solar cells, where semiconductors such
as Si and CdTe are commonly used as absorbers 7,12.
Undesirable defects and functional dopants in semicon-
ductor absorbers will respectively decrease and increase
the optical absorption and thus the power conversion
efficiency of single-junction, tandem, and bifacial solar
cells13. Similar effects are felt in applications such as
transistors, photodiodes, lasers, sensors, and quantum
information sciences 14–18. Canonical group IV, III-V, and
II-VI semiconductors are some of the most important
materials used in these applications, either as binary
compounds or alloys, typically in the Zinc Blende (ZB)
or wurtzite (WZ) phases. In addition to Si and CdTe,
compounds such as GaAs, SiC, CdSe, and CdS have been
used in photovoltaics (PVs). GaAs, GaN, ZnO, and InP are
employed in optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting
diodes (LEDs), laser diodes, quantum dots, and quantum
wells. GaN, AlN, and related compounds are desirable
wide band gap (WBG) semiconductors for power elec-
tronics19. Point defects negatively or positively impact
the performance of each of these materials; in general,
semiconductors with intrinsic defect tolerance and possible
n-type or p-type dopability are desired for optoelectronic
applications. Furthermore, defect levels in semiconductors
(e.g., NV-centers in diamond) have also been suggested as
qubits for quantum computing20 .
Experimentally , defect levels are measured using
techniques such as cathodoluminescence and deep-level
transient spectroscopy 21. However, these methods face
difficulties in sample preparation and assigning measured
levels to particular defects; e.g., it is not trivial to deter-
mine whether a captured peak is from a specific vacancy
or self-interstitial, or from an unwanted substitutional
or interstitial impurity 12. First principles-based density
functional theory (DFT) computations have thus been
widely used to calculate the formation energy (E f ) of
point defects as a function of Fermi level (E F), net charge
in the system ( q), and chemical potential ( µ)22,23. Such
computations help reliably identify the lowest energy
donor and acceptor defects, all possible shallow and deep
defect levels, the equilibrium conductivity as pinned by the
lowest energy defects (p-type, intrinsic, or n-type), defect
concentrations, electron/hole capture rates, and other
related properties. When using an appropriate level of
theory , DFT-computed charge transition levels have been
shown to match remarkably well with measured levels 12.
Although semi-local GGA functionals suffer from a lack of
accuracy in predicting the band gap and band edges24, the
discovery of low energy defect structures from GGA is still
crucial as it provides a base for further computations at
advanced levels of theory as well as the use of multi-fidelity
learning25, and computed properties often correlate well
with experiments or higher theory 12,26, thus providing a
means to a first-level screening or weeding out of unfavor-
able defects. Despite the successes of DFT, large-supercell
charged calculations are rather computationally expensive
even at the GGA level of theory, which makes it prohibitive
to perform defect calculations across a very large chemical
space.
Predicting defect properties can be significantly ac-
celerated by combining DFT data with state-of-the-art
machine learning (ML) models 12,26. Some recent efforts,
including our own past work, have shown that regression
models trained on a DFT dataset, using vectors encoding
the identity and elemental properties of the coordinating
atoms involved in creating a defect, can yield accurate
prediction and screening over tens of thousands of defects
and impurities 27–29. In published work from 2022 12, we
trained ML models to predict the formation energies and
charge transition levels of point defects in 34 ZB semicon-
ductors with a roughly 90% prediction accuracy , which
enabled qualitatively reliable screening of consequential
impurities from across a list of > 12,000. However, these
models suffer from the following limitations: (a) for a
wide chemical space, composition-based models 30 require
a significant amount of training data to accurately capture
the complex relationships between the material and target
properties, (b) all predictions are made for a supposed
ground state defect structure which means no competing
defective structures could be sampled and no lower energy
defect structures could theoretically be found, (c) the
errors are larger than desired, presumably due to lack of
information in the model inputs about the defective geom-
etry and how local coordination changes in the presence
of different defects, and (d) the predictive models cannot
trivially be applied to related but “out-of-sample" defects,
such as complexes and alloys within the same material
classes. A potential approach to tackle these issues arises
in the form of a “crystal graph", which is the most general
representation of a crystalline structure, automatically ac-
counting for different supercell sizes, types of ionic species,
mixing or added atoms, and metastable configurations.
Graph-based Neural Networks (GNNs) have been rising
in popularity over the last few years, and are widely
applied today for adequately representing and predicting
properties of molecules, polymers, and inorganic crys-
tals27,31–37. GNNs can work directly with graph-structured
data, converting crystal structures into crystal graphs
where the nodes are atomic positions and edges are
2 | 1–
PAGE 3
Fig. 1 DFT+GNN workflow to accelerate the prediction of defect formation energies and charge transition levels in semiconductors.
Here, Ef(q),E (Dq) ,E (bulk), ni, µi,EF,EVBM,Ecorr, ε (q1/q2) represent the formation energy of a defect at a charge state q, energy of a
defect supercell having charge q, the energy of the bulk supercell without any defect, the number of atoms being used to create the
point defect, chemical potential of the atom being used to create the point defect, the Fermi level or chemical potential of electron,
valence band maximum (VBM) of the bulk supercell, correction energy to compensate the periodic interaction of point defect, and defect
level, respectively. This visual enhancement illustrates that during training, each defective crystal is converted into a crystal graph
representation, which goes in as input to the GNN architecture31, where the outputs are the DFT -computed properties that serve to
train the input → output model.
chemical bonds. They are capable of learning internal
representations of crystals useful for predicting properties
ranging from formation or decomposition energy to band
gap to defect formation energy . ML models based only on
vectors encoding composition and/or elemental properties
are typically not suited to deal with crystalline polymorphs
of a given material, often requiring hand-crafted features
that are not generalizable. GNNs are known to be much
more flexible than composition-based models, as they can
be normalized with respect to system size or number of
atoms, and have the ability to capture important struc-
ture/chemistry information that contribute to properties of
interest. By learning the global representation of crystals,
GNNs can incorporate physical laws and phenomena on
larger scales and be used to predict properties that are
affected by long-range interactions. Predictive models
trained using GNNs show much better accuracy than
models that lack structural/geometry information.
In this article, we present one of the most compre-
hensive efforts undertaken to date for predicting defect
properties in semiconductors, by combining a massive
high-throughput (HT) DFT dataset of defect formation
energies (DFEs) with state-of-the-art GNNs. We utilize
our previously published dataset 12,26, bolstered by the
inclusion of thousands of partially-optimized and unop-
timized structures in addition to optimized structures,
along with several new computations, and train predictive
models using three types of established GNN schemes:
Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Network (CGCNN) 38,
Materials Graph Network (MEGNET) 39, and Atomistic
Line Graph Neural Network (ALIGNN) 40. We note that
there are a few other high-throughput DFT defect datasets
reported in the literature; in Table S3, we compare our
dataset with others in terms of the number of data points
and types of defects studied. We train GNN models on
datasets ranging from a few thousand to nearly 15,000
data points for point defects in different charge states,
across 40 or so unique ZB compounds. We present a
description of model optimization and visualization of
the prediction results for different defect types and show
how (a) ALIGNN predictions significantly improve upon
previous DFE estimates, with a root mean square error
(RMSE) of ∼ 0.3 eV, (b) predictions can be made for defect
1– | 3
PAGE 4
Fig. 2 Comparative distribution of Defect Formation Energy
(DFE) across four datasets that illustrates the distribution and
central tendencies of DFEs in Datasets 1,2,3, and 4. The width of
each violin indicates the density of data points, revealing patterns
and spread within each dataset. Inside each violin, a mini box
plot highlights the median (central line), quartiles, and range
(whiskers). For further interpretation of these plots, readers are
referred to the SI.
complexes and alloyed compositions by including a subset
of them in the training data, and (c) GNN predictions
for new systems can be used both for screening based on
upper-bound energies as well as for stabilizing any defect
by changing the defect coordination environment until the
GNN-predicted formation energy minimizes. We believe
this provides a novel and promising approach towards
predicting defect energetics and screening important
defects from large chemical spaces. Considerations of
the level of theory and future prospects of this work
are additionally discussed. The DFT+GNN workflow ap-
plied for predicting defect properties is presented inFig. 1.
2 Computational dataset
The semiconductor+defect chemical space considered in
this work is pictured in Fig. S1 in terms of the group
IV, III-V, and II-VI binary ZB compounds (referred to
henceforth as AB, with A being the cation and B the anion)
that serve as hosts to defects, elements selected from
across the periodic table as possible defects (henceforth
referred to as M for any substitutional or interstitial defect,
whereas vacancies will use V), and 5 possible symmetry
inequivalent defect sites, namely A-site (M A), B-site (M B),
tetrahedral interstitial site with 4 neighboring A atoms
(Mi,A), tetrahedral interstitial site with 4 neighboring B
atoms (Mi,B), and octahedral interstitial site with 3 A and
3 B atoms in the neighborhood (M i,oct). Here, we utilize 4
types of datasets: dataset 1 (all possible single native de-
fects in 34 binary ZB semiconductors), dataset 2 (hundreds
of substitutional and interstitial impurities across all ZB
compounds), dataset 3 (native defects and impurities in a
variety of CdSe xTe1−x alloys), and dataset 4 (some defect
complexes simulated in CdTe). Datasets 3 and 4 arise from
a parallel study on dopant-activation in CdTe-based solar
cells41 and are used here to evaluate the effectiveness of
GNN-based defect predictions for alloys and complexes.
All datasets contain DFEs calculated for at least 5 distinct
charged states (q = 0, +2, +1, -2, -1) at two extreme
chemical potential conditions, namely A-rich and B-rich.
Fig. 2 shows violin plots capturing the distribution of
DFEs (only for neutral defects at A-rich chemical potential
conditions) for all 4 datasets, with inset box plots show-
ing the median, lower quartile, and upper quartile for each.
The DFT details, including specific VASP input parame-
ters, level of theory information, reciprocal space sampling,
references for chemical potentials, and equations used for
DFE calculation, are present in our past publication 12. All
data is from the semi-local GGA-PBE functional, which
generally reproduces lattice parameters and relative
stabilities quite well, but is not reliable for electronic band
edges and band gaps, which is likely to affect computed
defect levels as well. The non-local hybrid HSE06 func-
tional42 is preferred for electronic and defect properties,
but is much more expensive and often requires tuning
of the mixing parameter (which determines the fraction
in which exact exchange from Hartree-Fock is combined
with the exchange-correlation energy from PBE), which
is very system-specific and not trivially applied across
large datasets 43. Beyond-DFT methods such as the GW
approximation, which expands the self-energy in terms of
the single-particle Green’s function G and the screened
Coulomb interaction W 43, are more reliable but too
prohibitively expensive to be applied high-throughput.
In past work 12, we showed that PBE computed defect
charge transition levels (CTLs), when plotted to span the
experimentally-known band gap of the semiconductor,
match rather well with measured defect levels for a dataset
of ∼ 80 defects in binary ZB compounds collected from
the literature, showing a PBE vs experiment RMSE of
0.21 eV. This approach of moving the conduction band
edge to match the experimental band gap starting from
the computed valence band edge is similar to corrections
successfully applied by other researchers as well 27,44.
A natural question arises here: how accurate are the
defect properties computed using PBE as compared to a
frequently used higher level method, namely the HSE06
4 | 1–
PAGE 5
functional? Ideally , one would perform HSE06 (with
the appropriate mixing parameter determined for each
material individually) or GW computations for all the
defects in the dataset, but clearly this is not computa-
tionally tractable without expending years of effort. We
reiterate here that we expect our PBE computed prop-
erties to correlate (in a highly complex and non-linear
composition/structure-dependent manner) with the higher
levels of theory which will facilitate multi-fidelity learning
efforts25, but more importantly , we trust the low energy
geometries and relative energetics of different defect struc-
tures from PBE, and also highlight the exciting opportunity
of the optimized ground-state structures being fed as input
to high-throughput HSE06, GW, or other calculations in
the near future.
Nevertheless, we performed some additional compu-
tations to benchmark our PBE results against HSE06.
We considered a wide range of native point defects and
selected dopants, namely , As Te, As Se and Cu Cd, in both
CdTe and CdSe, leading to a total of 34 defects. The
PBE-optimized structures were fed as input to HSE (32%
mixing parameter) calculations in 5 different charge
states with spin-orbit coupling (SOC) turned on in order
to capture the interaction of an electron’s spin with its
orbital motion around the nucleus (we refer to this as an
HSE+SOC calculation) 45,46. The specific choice of the
32% mixing parameter (or α = 0.32) is motivated by
studies in the literature 47 and by the fact that it closely
reproduces the experimental bandgaps of CdTe (1.47 eV
vs the experimental value of 1.5 eV) and CdSe (1.64 eV vs
the experimental value of 1.7 eV) 12,48. Computed DFEs
and CTLs from PBE and HSE+SOC are plotted against
each other in Fig. 3 . We find that there is some scatter
in the DFE comparison plot in Fig. 3(a) , which we owe
to the slight differences in energies of reference phases
from different levels of theory , but the major deviations
arise for higher energy defects and screening of low
energy defects using a certain PBE-DFE threshold should
still work well. On the other hand, we find remarkable
agreenment between the defect CTLs computed from
PBE and HSE+SOC as pictured in Fig. 3(b) . with a
few discrepancies mainly coming from -1/-2 and +2/+1
transitions. This is consistent with our previous assertions
and is primarily attributed to the fact that energy level
differences are often commensurate between different
levels of theory 49,50. This correlation in defect levels is
particularly noteworthy (with the caveat that this testing is
done for a small dataset), as it underscores the robustness
of the PBE approach in accurately capturing the electronic
structure with defect states in these semiconductors to
identify the shallow or deep nature of these defects.
Thus, PBE-level DFEs and transition levels may be
sufficient for a first-level screening of low-energy defects.
Inaccuracies will still persist from incorrectly locating VBM
and CBM, but appropriate corrections can be applied af-
terwards using different higher-accuracy bulk calculations
once PBE-level DFEs are predicted for multiple q and µ
conditions. Two such possible correction methods include
using the modified band alignment approach based on
PBE and HSE06 band gap values 51, and shifting both
band edge positions using GW quasiparticle energies 52.
The focus of present work is to demonstrate the acceler-
ated prediction of PBE-level defect energetics, and the
aforementioned corrections will be considered in future
work. In the next few subsections, a detailed description
is provided for the four datasets generated at the PBE level.
2.1 Dataset 1
Dataset 1 contains DFEs for all possible native defects in
each AB compound, namely V A (vacancy at A-site), V B,
Ai,A (A self-interstitial at A-coordinated tetrahedral site),
Ai,B, A i,oct (A self-interstitial at octahedral site), B i,A, B i,B,
Bi,oct, A B (A on B anti-site substitution), and B A. All AB
compounds, simulated in the cubic ZB structure with A
atoms occupying an FCC lattice and B atoms occupying
tetrahedral sites, are listed as follows: 8 II-VI compounds
(ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, CdO, CdS, CdSe, and CdTe), 16
III–V compounds (AlN, AlP, AlAs, AlSb, BN, BP, BAs, BSb,
GaN, GaP, GaAs, GaSb, InN, InP, InAs, and InSb), and 10
group IV compounds (SiC, GeC, SnC, SiGe, SiSn, GeSn,
C, Si, Ge, and Sn). There are a total of 312 possible
native defects across the 34 compounds, and DFEs were
computed for all under both A-rich and B-rich conditions.
From each of the 312 ( × 5 q states) PBE geometry
optimization calculations, we collected all possible “inter-
mediate structures”, that is, geometries generated during
the course of the optimization, all the way from pristine
structure (which is simply the ground state semiconductor
bulk supercell structure with a defect introduced) to the
fully optimized structure; also collected were the total
DFT energies corresponding to each structure. The shell
script used to collect intermediate structures (IS) for every
defect from XDATCAR and corresponding energies from
OUTCAR (typical output files in VASP53) is added to the SI
and available on GitHub. The DFE corresponding to every
IS is estimated as E f (IS) = E DFT (IS)- E DFT (optimized
structure) + E f (optimized structure).
1– | 5
PAGE 6
Fig. 3 A comparison of defect properties computed from PBE and HSE+SOC for 34 selected point defects in CdTe and CdSe. (a) The
defect formation energy at Fermi level EF =0 under Cd-rich growth conditions across 5 charge states. (b) 4 types of defect charge
transition levels, namely +2/+1, +1/0, 0/-1, and -1/-2.
Dataset Data Points
Native defects in 34 compounds (Dataset 1) 2053 (q=+2), 1840 (q=+1), 3071 (q=0), 1966 (q=-1), 1498 (q=-2)
Impurities in 34 compounds (Dataset 2) 5326 (q=+2), 3990 (q=+1), 13966 (q=0), 3568 (q=-1), 4628 (q=-2)
Native defects in CdSexTe1-x (Dataset 3) 291 (q=+2), 322 (q=+1), 734 (q=0), 305 (q=-1), 329 (q=-2)
Defect complexes in CdTe (Dataset 4) 47 (q=0)
Table 1 Number of data points for each charge state q across Datasets 1, 2, 3, and 4.
This approach helps swell the DFT native defect dataset
to 3071 data points for q = 0, and between ∼ 1500 and
∼ 2000 points for the other q values, as reported in Table
1. The lower number of structures for the charged systems
as compared to the neutral defects comes from the fact
that most of the geometry optimization takes place during
the neutral calculation, whereas the charged calculations
typically use the optimized neutral defect geometry as their
starting point. All the IS serve as energetically accessible
but not ground state defective structures, which can play
an important role in understanding the dynamics and
behavior of the crystal, but also provide an energetically
and structurally diverse dataset for a GNN model to be
trained on. This also ensures that the GNN “knows” what
an unoptimized, partially optimized, and fully optimized
defect structure looks like, meaning it will yield the correct
energy corresponding to any hypothetical new structure
and potentially help reduce the energy by subtly modifying
the defect coordination environment.
2.2 Dataset 2
Dataset 2 contains hundreds of impurities or extrinsic de-
fects (M) at various sites, namely M A, MB, Mi,A, Mi,B, and
Mi,oct, across each of the 34 unique AB compounds. The
five distinct defect sites are considered in 30 binary com-
pounds and three defect sites (A-site, one tetrahedral inter-
stitial site, and one octahedral interstitial site) are consid-
ered in the elemental systems (C, Si, Ge, and Sn). This
dataset encompasses a wide range of singular impurity
atoms, including groups I to VII, all transition metals, and
all lanthanides, leading to a total of 77 species, as shown in
Fig. S1 . The total number of possible impurities resulting
from this can be calculated as 77 × 5 × 30 + 77 × 3 × 4
= 12,474 (many of these would coincide with the native
defects described earlier). Out of this dataset of 12,474 de-
fects, 1566 were chosen for complete neutral-state geom-
etry optimization, and ∼ 1000 were subjected to charged
calculations as well; points in the DFT dataset exhibit suf-
ficient chemical diversity in terms of semiconductor type,
element type, and defect site type, to adequately represent
the entire chemical space. Once again, we collected all
6 | 1–
PAGE 7
IS from the DFT optimization runs for each impurity in 5
different q states, leading to nearly 14,000 data points for
q=0 and between 3500 and 5300 data points for the other
q values, as reported in Table 1.
2.3 Dataset 3
This dataset includes several possible native defects in a
series of CdSe xTe1−x alloys (x = 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5,
0.625, 0.75, and 0.875), namely V Cd, V Te, V Se, Cd i, Te i,
Sei, Cd Te, Cd Se, TeCd, and Se Cd. This results in a total of
82 unique defects across the 7 mixed compositions, which
are of interest in CdTe solar cells where Se is often mixed
at the anion site 54–58. DFEs are computed for each defect
in 5 q states at Cd-rich and Te/Se-rich conditions to obtain
the two extreme ranges of energies, and all the IS are
collected from the optimization runs. Total datasets of a
few hundred points are thus compiled, as shown in Table
1. This dataset will help examine whether GNN models
trained on defects in pure unmixed compositions (CdTe
and CdSe) are applicable to alloyed compositions in the
same chemical space, and how many new alloy data points
might need to be added to the training set to achieve
satisfactory accuracy .
2.4 Dataset 4
Finally , we posit that crystal graphs should be capable of
representing any type of defect complexes as well in ad-
dition to the single-point defects described above. For ex-
haustively investigating defect tolerance and dopability of
a semiconductor, it is vital to consider likely defect com-
plexes, which are typically multiple point defects or impu-
rities that form simultaneously in the lattice and interact
with each other. Examples include Schhotky and Frenkel
defects, and compensating vacancies or interstitials that
form along with dopants. The V Ga–ON–2H triple complex
was found to have a very low energy in GaN 59, and it has
recently been suggested that As-O based complexes may
form in CdTe41. Thus, we simulated a series of complexes
such as V Cd+AsTe and V Te+CuCd in CdTe, resulting in a
small dataset of 47 points of neutral state defects, for both
Cd-rich and Te/Se-rich conditions, including all the IS.
3 DFT optimized vs unoptimized formation energy
Before training GNN models, we analyzed the DFT datasets
to determine the scale of the differences between DFEs
from full DFT-optimization and from pristine, unoptimized
defect structures. For any hypothetical defect, an unop-
timized pristine structure could be trivially generated
simply by inserting the defect of interest in an optimized
bulk supercell, but obtaining the ground state DFE is a
matter of optimizing this structure, which would involve
a PBE calculation that runs for minutes, hours, or days,
depending on the nature of the defect. The purpose of
GNN-based on-demand predictions is to reduce this time
drastically . Since any new GNN predictions would likely
be made using pristine defect structures, it is informative
to examine, for a given type of defect, how low the
energy could go starting from the unoptimized DFE if full
optimization were to be performed.
Fig. 4 shows unoptimized DFE plotted against the
fully optimized DFE, for the dataset of 312 native defects
across 34 AB compounds (Dataset 1), at both A-rich and
B-rich conditions. The unoptimized DFEs are obtained
by performing fixed-volume single ionic step calculations
on the pristine defect-introduced structures. The dataset
is divided into vacancies, anti-site substitutions, and self-
interstitials. It can be seen that the amount of geometry
relaxation happening in vacancy structures is minimal,
with the two types of DFEs almost always being very
similar to each other. On the other hand, interstitials
and anti-sites often undergo major atomic rearrangement,
such that the optimized defect coordination environment
may look starkly different from the starting structure,
thus leading to DFE differences ranging from 1 eV to
nearly 8 eV. The large differences for interstitials could be
understood in terms of the unfavorability of introducing an
extra cation or anion in a tetrahedral or octahedral void;
the larger the ionic radii, the greater this unfavorability .
Substitutions depend on the size differences between A
and B, and may thus show either a low or high energy
variability . These trends roughly inform the threshold that
must be applied upon unoptimized DFEs (say , from GNN
predictions) to determine their likelihood of stability upon
full optimization. It should be noted that the intermediate
structures collected from each “optimization run” essen-
tially span the range of the unoptimized to optimized DFE,
yielding hundreds of structures for some defects and only
a handful for others.
4 Graph Neural Network Architecture
In this section, we briefly describe the technical details
behind the three GNN schemes chosen in this study ,
namely CGCNN, MEGNET, and ALIGNN.
4.1 Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Network
(CGCNN)
CGCNN, developed by Xie et al. 38, is a deep learning ar-
chitecture that takes a crystal graph as input and applies a
1– | 7
PAGE 8
Fig. 4 DFT unoptimized vs optimized neutral defect formation energy in Dataset 1, under (a) A-rich, and (b) B-rich chemical potential
conditions.
series of convolution and pooling operations to extract fea-
tures that capture the underlying properties of the crystal.
These features are subsequently fed into a fully connected
neural network (FCNN) to make predictions of the proper-
ties of interest60. The CGCNN framework is pictured inFig.
S2(a) and its operation is described below:
1. Structure representation: The crystal structure is rep-
resented as a graph where the atoms are nodes and
the bonds are edges. The nodes and edges are labeled
with features such as atomic coordinates, and bond
length.
2. Graph convolutional layers: CGCNN applies multiple
graph convolutional layers to the input graph wherein
each layer aggregates information from neighboring
nodes and edges and learns features that capture the
local environment. Generally , the convolution opera-
tion includes computing a weighted sum of the fea-
tures of neighboring nodes and edges, followed by a
non-linear activation function61,62 :
v(t+1)
i = v(t)
i +∑
j,k
σ

z(t)
(i, j)k
W (t)
f + b(t)
f

⊙g

z(t)
(i, j)k
W (t)
s + b(t)
s

(1)
Here, v(t+1)
i is the updated feature vector of atom i at
layer t + 1, v(t)
i represents the feature vector of atom i
at the previous layert, ∑ j,k indicates a summation over
all neighbors j of atom i and over all bond types k be-
tween atoms i and j, σ is a non-linear activation func-
tion, z(t)
(i, j)k
represents the edge feature vector between
atoms i and j with bond type k at layer t, W (t)
f and W (t)
s
are trainable weight matrices at layert,W (t)
f is used for
filtering (hence the subscript f ) and W (t)
s is used for
scaling (hence the subscript s), b(t)
f and b(t)
s are bias
vectors at layer t corresponding to the weight matri-
ces W (t)
f and W (t)
s , respectively ,⊙ denotes element-wise
multiplication, and g is another non-linear activation
function.
3. Pooling layer: The output of the last convolutional
layer is passed through a global pooling layer (e.g.,
min, max pooling), which aggregates the features of
all nodes in the graph into a single vector 61,62. This
vector contains information about the entire crystal
structure, including all atomic coordinates, bond dis-
tances, and well-known elemental properties of each
atom such as ionization energy and electronegativity .
hpool = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
h(L)
i (2)
Here, hpool is the output feature vector of the pooling
layer, N is the total number of nodes in the graph, and
h(L)
i is the feature vector of node i in the last layer L.
4. Fully connected neural network (FCNN): Finally , the
output of the pooling layer is fed into an FCNN, which
is trained like a regular NN-regression model to make
predictions.
y = f
 
Wf chpool + b f c

(3)
8 | 1–
PAGE 9
Here, y is the predicted property ,Wf c is the weight ma-
trix of the FCNN, b f c is the bias vector, hpool is the out-
put feature vector of the pooling layer, and f is a non-
linear activation function such as ReLU or sigmoid.
4.2 Materials Graph Network (MEGNET)
The MEGNET framework was developed and released by
Chen et al. in 2019 39 and is pictured in Fig. S2(b). MEG-
NET uses elemental embeddings to encode periodic chemi-
cal trends that can be used to improve the performance of
models with limited training data. Elemental embeddings
are vector representations of elements that capture their
chemical properties that are typically learned from a large
dataset of crystals. When a new crystal is encountered, the
embeddings can be used to predict the properties of inter-
est. The MEGNET methodology is described below:
1. Graph representation of materials: MEGNET repre-
sents the crystal as a graph where the atoms are the
nodes, and the edges represent the connections be-
tween the atoms. Each atom is associated with a set of
features such as its atomic number, coordinates, and
chemical environment.
2. Message passing algorithm: MEGNET uses a message-
passing algorithm to capture the interactions between
atoms in the crystal. Each atom sends a message to
its neighboring atoms, which is a function of the node
and edge features. The messages are then aggregated
at each node and the resulting feature vector is used
as input to a neural network.
3. Readout layer: The output of the message-passing al-
gorithm is passed through a readout layer which maps
the learned node and edge features to target proper-
ties, and a loss function is calculated to capture the
difference between the predicted and actual values.
4.3 Atomistic Line Graph Neural Network (ALIGNN)
ALIGNN is a novel approach developed by Choudhary et
al.40, that differs from CGCNN and MEGNET in terms of
considering three-body interactions (bond angles) as well
in addition to two-body terms (bond lengths). ALIGNN
leverages both graph convolutional layers and line graph
convolutional63 layers to capture both short-range and
long-range correlations in the crystal. The framework (pic-
tured in Fig. S2(c)) is described below:
1. Atomic feature extraction: ALIGNN takes as input a
graph representing the atomic structure of the crystal.
Each node (atom) in the graph is associated with a
set of atomic features, which includes properties such
as electronegativity , group number, covalent radius,
valence electrons, ionization energy , electron affinity ,
atomic block, and atomic volume. Each edge (bond)
in the graph is associated with both the bond angle
and bond distance.
2. Graph convolutional layers: ALIGNN uses graph con-
volutional layers to update the feature vectors of each
node based on the features of its neighboring nodes.
In each layer, the feature vectors are updated using
a weighted sum of the features of neighboring nodes,
similar to other models. This step captures short-range
interactions in the structure.
3. Line graph construction: To capture long-range corre-
lations, ALIGNN constructs a line graph on top of the
original crystal graph. The line graph has nodes that
represent unique bonds between atoms, correspond-
ing to edges in the crystal graph. The line graph edges
connect pairs of bonds that share a central atom in
the crystal graph, effectively capturing bond angle in-
formation. ALIGNN then applies another set of graph
convolutional layers to the line graph, which updates
the feature vectors of each bond based on the features
of neighboring bonds. The information from the line
graph is then propagated back to the original crystal
graph to update the bond features in combination with
the node features.
4. Feature refinement: After the line graph convolution,
ALIGNN refines the feature vectors for each edge using
a set of learnable transformations that help capture
more complex interactions between atoms and bonds.
5. Graph pooling: ALIGNN aggregates the refined bond-
level feature vectors into a single graph-level feature
vector using a graph pooling operation that summa-
rizes the relevant information from the entire crystal
graph.
6. Output prediction: Finally , the graph-level feature vec-
tor is fed to an FCNN for making predictions.
5 Results and Discussion
5.1 Testing GNN models on Dataset 1
As a first step, we tested the performance of CGCNN,
MEGNET, and ALIGNN for predicting the q=0 E f for
Dataset 1 only . For each model, the data is split 60:20:20
into training, validation, and test sets. The CGCNN
training protocol has several important hyperparameters
that must either be kept fixed at recommended values or
rigorously tuned over a set of possible values, such as the
1– | 9
PAGE 10
Fig. 5 Parity plots for rigorously optimized (a) CGCNN, (b) MEGNET, and (c) ALIGNN models, trained on Dataset 1 for A-rich chemical
potential conditions and q = 0.
number of properties used in the atom feature vector, the
number of convolutional layers, the length of the learned
atom feature vector, the number of hidden layers, the
regularization term, the scaling factor of the Gaussian
initialization of weights, step size of the Adam optimizer64,
dropout fraction, batch size, number of epochs, and the
cut-off distance r cut for constructing the crystal graph.
Here, we optimized only the batch size, epochs and r cut,
keeping the rest of the hyperparameters the same as in the
original CGCNN publication 38. A parity plot for the best
CGCNN predictions on Dataset 1 (for A-rich conditions)
is pictured in Fig. 5(a) , showing RMSE of 0.19 eV, 0.41
eV, and 0.35 eV respectively on the training, validation,
and test sets. These errors are already far lower than our
previously published DFE test prediction errors of ∼ 0.6
eV for defects in Cd-based chalcogenides 26 and ∼ 1 eV
across many group IV, II-VI, and III-V semiconductors 12,
as well as being highly competitive with the state of the
art for such predictions. Learning curves showing how the
CGCNN errors converge as the epochs, batch size, and r cut
increase are presented in Fig. S3.
In the context of GNN for materials science and engineer-
ing, the rcut parameter typically refers to the cutoff radius
for considering atomic interactions, and convolutional lay-
ers are used to aggregate information from the neighbors
within this cutoff radius. If rcut is too small, important in-
teractions between atoms or defects that are slightly farther
apart may not be included, potentially missing critical infor-
mation about the defect properties of interest. On the other
hand, a larger rcut allows the model to consider a broader
neighborhood, which could include interactions between
defects, especially if they are within that distance, which
is unwanted. In DFT calculations, we utilized a 2 × 2 × 2
supercell configuration, and as a result, the dimensions of
these supercells for various IV-IV, III-V, II-V1 semiconduc-
tors range from 10 to 14Å. Periodic images of point defects
are generally approximately 12Å apart, a span greater than
the rcut used in generating the crystal graph. Consequently ,
given that our rcut is shorter than the separation between
two periodic point defects, the larger convolution layers
in our model are unlikely to erroneously aggregate infor-
mation from neighboring point defects. This careful setup
helps in maintaining the accuracy and specificity of the in-
teraction data within our model.
Next, we trained a MEGNET model as shown inFig. 5(b)
following the same strategy . Notable hyperparameters in-
clude the number of interaction blocks, number of hid-
den layers, hidden layer size, learning rate, regularization
strength, dropout rate, batch size, activation function, num-
ber of features assigned to each bond in the input graph,
and rcut. Here, we only optimized the number of epochs,
batch size, and r cut, and the rest of the parameters are di-
rectly adopted from the MEGNET publication 39. We find
that MEGNET once again performs much better than pre-
vious composition-based models, but shows slightly larger
errors than CGCNN with RMSE of 0.36 eV, 0.42 eV, and
0.40 eV on the training, validation, and test sets, respec-
tively . The test error is close enough to the CGCNN er-
ror of 0.35 eV to justify the use of MEGNET over CGCNN,
especially since MEGNET significantly corrects any possi-
ble overfitting in the CGCNN models by yielding roughly
similar training, validation, and test errors. MEGNET has
a more complex model architecture than CGCNN and in-
cludes elemental embeddings encoding periodic chemical
trends which may allow better generalization to unseen
data.
Finally , we trained an ALIGNN model on Dataset 1 and
found that it yields better performance than both CGCNN
and MEGNET, with a slight concern of model overfitting al-
10 | 1–
PAGE 11
leviated by the remarkably low values of validation and test
RMSEs. As shown in Fig. 5(c) , the test RMSE is 0.15 eV,
which represents a 99 % accuracy considering the DFE val-
ues range from 0 eV to 15 eV. The reason for the improve-
ment from CGCNN and MEGNET could be attributed to the
line graph convolution step that captures long-range inter-
actions, which may be important for particular point de-
fects whose presence affects atomic arrangements beyond
just the first nearest neighbor shell, causing larger lattice
distortions. For training ALIGNN models, we use r cut = 8
Å, 12 nearest neighbors, 4 graph convolutional layers, 4
line graph layers, learning rate = 0.001, batch size = 16,
an Adamw optimizer, and 150 epochs. We tested a few dif-
ferent choices for training-validation-test splits of the en-
tire dataset, and the test RMSE obtained for each is shown
in Table S1. We find that the error does not change be-
yond the 60-20-20 split, and thus use this choice for all the
final optimized models in this work. We also performed 5-
fold cross-validation (CV) dividing the dataset from Figure
4 into five equal parts. Each fold served as the validation
set once, while the remaining four folds collectively formed
the training set. This cycle was repeated five times, ensur-
ing that every segment of the dataset was used for valida-
tion exactly once. In each iteration, the model was trained
on the training set and then evaluated on the validation set.
The RMSE was calculated for each validation phase, provid-
ing insights into the model’s performance on different data
segments as shown in Table S2 with an average RMSE of
0.15 eV over 5 cycles. This outcome aligns closely with
the validation RMSE of 0.16 eV obtained without the ap-
plication of a 5-fold CV, affirming the model’s consistency
and reliability . The standard scikit-learn package conve-
niently includes a built-in module for k-fold CV, which au-
tomates the process of segmenting the dataset into multi-
ple folds and systematically iterating through these folds
for training and validation. However, in our case, working
with GNN models, we did not have access to a comparable,
integrated module for k-fold CV. As a result, we were re-
quired to implement this process manually which entailed
meticulously dividing our dataset into k distinct folds, se-
quentially using each fold as the validation set while the
remaining folds constituted the training set, and then re-
peating this process k times – once for each fold. This man-
ual approach, although more labor-intensive, was crucial
for ensuring the thorough evaluation and validation of our
GNN models, particularly given their unique architecture
and the specific nature of our dataset. We also trained the
ALIGNN model using only unoptimized configurations (see
Fig.S17), which shows much larger test errors owing to a
smaller dataset size, validating our approach of expanding
the defect geometries to ∼ 15,000 structures. Results of
hyperparameter optimization with ALIGNN are presented
in Fig. S4 , which is a more computationally expensive
step than for the other two methods, motivating the use
of much of the same hyperparameters as in past work 40.
However, the training time is still reasonable and the accu-
racy payoff is immense; thus, we use ALIGNN as the GNN
scheme of choice going forward, and discuss prediction per-
formances for Datasets 2, 3, and 4 in the next subsection.
Table 2lists the optimized training, validation, and test set
RMSE values for CGCNN, MEGNET, and ALIGNN models
trained on Dataset 1. It is important to clarify that during
the initial phase of our study , we experimented with var-
ious schemes including CGCNN, MEGNET, and ALIGNN.
However, after preliminary testing, we decided to exclu-
sively focus on the ALIGNN scheme for all subsequent ML
training. The significant hyperparameters of the ALIGNN
model, which were critical to our study , are comprehen-
sively listed in the SI for reference.
It is important to note that the DFEs can vary depending
on the size of the supercell. This variation is due to the
interaction of defects with their periodic images in smaller
supercells, which can lead to significant energy differences,
although we have employed charge correction to compen-
sate for this interaction. The final reported defect proper-
ties are always assumed to be converged with respect to
supercell size, which should be large enough to regard the
point defect as dilute in concentration. To test the supercell
size effect, we simulated some of the dominant point de-
fects in CdTe, including VCd,VTe,Cdi,AsTeTe,ClTe,Asi and
Cli, using a 3 × 3 × 3 supercell and used the same ALIGNN
based geometry optimization to make DFE prediction. Fig-
ure S15 shows that the DFT-computed DFEs from 2 × 2 × 2
and 3 × 3 × 3 supercells match very well with each other,
showing the reliability of limiting the defect supercell size
to 2 × 2 × 2. Figure S16 shows a comparison between the
ALIGNN-predicted and DFT-computed DFEs of the same de-
fects in the3×3×3 supercell. A discrepancy exists between
the ALIGNN and DFT data, indicating that our current GNN
models are not yet adept at making reliable predictions for
3 × 3 × 3 supercells. To address this limitation, it is essen-
tial to adapt our model to better understand and interpret
3 × 3 × 3 supercell structures. This can be achieved by in-
corporating additional DFT-derived DFEs from 3 × 3 × 3 su-
percells into our training dataset, thereby enhancing the
model’s familiarity and predictive accuracy with this spe-
cific supercell configuration.
5.2 Extending ALIGNN to Datasets 2, 3, and 4
To determine whether the GNN models optimized so
far could directly be applied to impurities, complexes,
1– | 11
PAGE 12
GNN Scheme Train RMSE (eV)Validation RMSE (eV)Test RMSE (eV)
CGCNN 0.19 0.41 0.35
MEGNET 0.36 0.42 0.40
ALIGNN 0.03 0.16 0.15
Table 2 Training, validation, and test set RMSEs for different GNN models trained on Dataset 1 at A rich conditions.
Fig. 6 Parity plots for ALIGNN models trained on (q=0, A-rich) (a) Dataset 1 + Dataset 2, (b) Dataset 1 + Dataset 3, and (c) Dataset 1
+ Dataset 4. (I) refers to models trained purely on Dataset 1 and tested on Dataset 2, 3 or 4, whereas (II) refers to 50 % of the new
dataset added to the training set with Dataset 1. We additionally included the coefficient of determination
 
R2
values for the models in
Figure 5(a − c) in Table S7, encompassing both Case (I) and Case (II) analyses.
and alloys, we first tested the ALIGNN model trained on
dataset 1 for their predictive power on datasets 2, 3, and
4, before suitably re-optimizing the models by adding
more training data points. Fig. 6 shows the prediction
performance of the ALIGNN model trained only on dataset
1 for dataset 2 (a), dataset 3 (b), and dataset 4 (c),
along with the improvement in the predictions when
50 % of any new dataset is added to the training set
and the ALIGNN model is retrained. The RMSE for the
dataset 1-trained ALIGNN model is as high as 2.17 eV for
dataset 2, 2.68 eV for dataset 3, and 2.98 eV for dataset 4,
showing very poor performances that become worse going
from native defects to impurities to alloys to complexes.
The structure-property relationships learned from native
defects alone cannot be generalized to extrinsic species
or non-binary compounds, or indeed, the presence of
multiple simultaneous defects that will inevitably cause far
higher distortions and atomic rearrangements compared
to single defects.
Upon combining 50 % of each dataset (chosen ran-
domly) with dataset 1 and re-optimizing the model using
the same approach as before, and performing necessary
hyperparameter optimization anew, RMSE values improve
drastically to 0.36 eV for dataset 2, 0.70 eV for dataset 3,
and 0.18 eV for dataset 4. Upon adding 50% training data,
the performance improvement is much better in dataset
4 than dataset 3 , which can be attributed to two things:
(a) the much smaller dataset of complexes ( 47 points)
compared to defects in alloys (734 points in the neutral
state), and the similarity of some of these complexes with
one another, which makes it easier to extend predictions
from the training to test sets, with the small data size
also skewing predictions, and (b) the amount of structural
complexity is much higher in the alloy dataset than the
complex dataset, as the former contains several new atoms
dispersed in the lattice (e.g., half the Te atoms in a CdTe
supercell being replaced by Se to make CdSe0.5Te0.5 ) as
opposed to just one or two new atoms in the case of a
defect complex. These errors will go further down as more
data is added to the training set, showing that each type of
defect data needs to be adequately represented during the
training process for generalizing the ALIGNN predictive
power. This exercise provides insights into the challenges
associated with representing and predicting the energetics
of defects in different defect categories with a limited
training dataset and demonstrates the importance of
training ML models on comprehensive datasets to improve
their performance across various defect types.
Next, we trained predictive models by combining all
four datasets, for all charge states and chemical potential
conditions. For charged defects, the DFE value is taken to
be E f (EF=0), because by predicting this value for each
12 | 1–
PAGE 13
charge state, the E f vs EF plot can be extended across the
band gap region by using straight lines with slope = q.
Thus, a total of 10 different ALIGNN models are trained
for the combined dataset, for Ef (q=+2, EF=0), E f (q=+1,
EF=0), E f (q=0, E F=0), E f (q=-1, E F=0), and E f (q=-2,
EF=0), at A-rich and B-rich chemical potential conditions.
As seen in Fig. S5 , there are a handful of outliers in the
parity plots, especially in the case of E f (q=0, E F=0),
which may result from some structures getting stuck in
local minima during DFT optimization, and possible inac-
curacies in the GNN model that may be fixed with more
data and/or hyperparameter optimization. We removed
a few notable outliers and trained the models again, to
obtain the best ALIGNN predictive models that may be
applied for new data points. The q=+1, q=0, and q=-1
ALIGNN models at A-rich conditions are pictured in Fig.
7(a), (b), and (c), respectively , and the remaining 7 mod-
els are presented in Figs. S6 and S7. These models show
very respectable RMSE values, suggesting that ALIGNN
is capable of effectively learning the structure-property
correlations in each dataset and each charge state, and
generalizing them across all data types. Test prediction
errors for q=+2, q=+1, q=0, q=-1, and q=-2 are found
to be 0.30 eV, 0.23 eV, 0.32 eV, 0.25 eV, and 0.26 eV,
respectively , representing a 98 % accuracy . The slightly
larger errors for the neutral defects arise from the larger
structural diversity for q=0 defect structures compared to
the charged defect structures, also manifesting in much
larger numbers of q=0 data points (e.g., 13,966 in dataset
2) than q=+1 (3990 in dataset 2) or q=-1 (3568 in
dataset 2). The training, validation, and test errors for
the best ALIGNN models for different charge states under
A-rich conditions are listed in Table 3.
To investigate the variation in the RMSE of dataset 1
when dataset 2, dataset 3, and dataset 4 are successively
integrated with it, we expanded our analysis by incorporat-
ing datasets 2,3, and 4, in addition to dataset 1, to train
four distinct ALIGNN models at q = 0 under A rich con-
ditions. The corresponding RMSE values for these mod-
els on the test sets are included in Table S6. Our analy-
sis revealed that the lowest RMSE was achieved when the
ALIGNN model was trained exclusively on dataset 1. The
introduction of additional datasets (datasets 2,3, and 4)
does not notably change the RMSE of Dataset 1 as shown
in Table S6, and the overall RMSE on the combined dataset
is 0.32eV, which is a satisfactory error given the range of
values and the fact that it works for each dataset.
Also, to examine the effect of different types of point
defects on the GNN performance, we trained separate
ALIGNN models for vacancy , substitutional, and intersti-
tial defects, for the same dataset used for the models in
Fig.6c. An ALIGNN vs DFT parity plot showing predic-
tions for different defect types is presented in Fig. S13 .
Primarily , the high test RMSE of 1 eV for vacancy defects
suggests that the limited data ( 705 points) available for
this type might not be adequate for effective training. Any
deep learning model like a GNN requires substantial data
to accurately learn and predict complex patterns that are
less pronounced for substitution (∼ 453) and interstitial
(∼ 12558) defects, where the data volume is sufficient, re-
flected in lower RMSEs of 0.36 eV and 0.42 eV, respectively .
Furthermore, the combined model likely benefits from a
more generalized approach, leveraging patterns across all
defect types, leading to a lower overall RMSE of 0.32 eV.
In contrast, training separate models for each defect type
focuses on the specific patterns of each category , poten-
tially exposing limitations in data quantity or complexity
handling, thus resulting in higher RMSEs for individual de-
fect types. We observe that interstitial defects, particularly
those involving larger cations/anions, require rigorous DFT
optimization. This complexity can challenge the generaliza-
tion capabilities of ALIGNN models. Consequently , despite
interstitial defects having the largest dataset volume, their
performance is relatively constrained compared to substi-
tutional defects. This limitation underscores the model’s
difficulty in adapting to the intricate variations and struc-
tural changes associated with these specific defect types.
We reiterate that the model trained on all the defect types
combined yields very good performance for all, with test
RMSE of for vacancies 0.40 eV, 0.29 eV for interstitials, and
0.38 eV for substitutional defects.
5.3 ALIGNN-unoptimized vs DFT-optimized energies
The next objective is to utilize the best ALIGNN models to
make predictions for new defects and perform screening
of potentially low-energy defects based on predicted DFEs.
The caveat here is that for any new defect, one could only
really generate an “unoptimized” defect structure, and
thus the only ALIGNN prediction that can be made is the
unoptimized DFE. As described earlier, a full DFT optimiza-
tion of any defect structure is obviously a time-consuming
step, involving structural relaxation until atomic forces
become close to zero and the energy of the crystal reaches
a minimum. In contrast, ALIGNN prediction of unopti-
mized DFE can be performed in seconds and thus used
to estimate the unoptimized energies of hundreds of
thousands of defect structures, which could then be used
as a surrogate for screening based on some upper bound
values65,66. However, ALIGNN predictions could also, in
theory , be used to replace DFT-based energy estimates
1– | 13
PAGE 14
Charge Train RMSE (eV) Validation RMSE (eV) Test RMSE (eV)
q = +2 0.10 0.25 0.30
q = +1 0.07 0.27 0.23
q = 0 0.20 0.30 0.32
q = -1 0.11 0.26 0.25
q = -2 0.06 0.26 0.26
Table 3 Training, validation, and test set RMSEs for ALIGNN models trained on different charge states at A rich condition.
Fig. 7 Parity plots for ALIGNN models trained on Datasets 1 + 2 + 3 + 4, for (a) Ef (q=+1, EF=0), (b) E f (q=0, EF=0), and (c) E f (q=-1,
EF=0), under A-rich chemical potential conditions. Parity plots for Ef (q=+2, EF=0) and E f (q=-2, EF=0), as well as all parity plots for
B-rich DFEs, are presented in the SI.
within a gradient descent-type optimization process 67–69,
or using brute-force structure generation and energy
evaluation, and thus quickly yield low energy structures at
near-DFT accuracy for any hypothetical crystalline defects.
To test the correspondence between ALIGNN-
unoptimized energies and DFT-optimized energies, we
plotted the ALIGNN-predicted E f (q=0) (ALIGNN-unopt)
on pristine structures of all defects across datasets 1, 2,
3, and 4, against the DFT-optimized E f (q=0) (DFT-opt),
in Fig. 8 (a) . We expect the ALIGNN-unopt DFE values
to always be higher than the DFT-opt values, and this is
indeed the case of > 95 % of the data points. However,
we do find the opposite to be true for several defects,
which is perhaps a consequence of the statistical nature of
ML predictions, which are very accurate on average but
may show large errors for certain outliers. Importantly ,
notable differences between ALIGNN-unopt and DFT-opt
values are seen for many defects where large structural
changes are expected upon full relaxation. Some examples
include V Si in SiC (8.28 eV difference), V In in InN (7.63
eV difference), and Cs i,oct in SiC (7.17 eV difference). By
examining the 300 defects out of this total list of 1747
defects (plotted in Fig. 8 (a) ) which show the largest
ALIGNN-unopt vs DFT-opt energy differences, we find an
average difference of ∼ 1 eV; thus, we could apply a rough
general equivalence of DFT-opt = ALIGNN-unopt – 1 eV,
and use this information to perform a high-throughput
screening of likely low energy defects. Similar trends are
expected to hold for ALIGNN-unopt vs DFT-opt energies of
charged defects as well.
We further performed a thorough analysis comparing
DFT-optimized and unoptimized energies. Specifically , we
focused on evaluating the error distribution, which repre-
sents the energy differences between optimized and unop-
timized structures. This analysis, detailed in Fig. S11, and
SI encompasses dataset 1. The findings reveal that for a
large majority of defects, the error variably spans from 0
to 1.2 eV. This range validates our proposed correlation
between DFT-opt and ALIGNN-unopt (assuming ALIGNN-
unopt matches well with DFT-unopt), demonstrating that
the approximation of a ∼ 1 eV difference is not only sta-
tistically significant but also practically applicable in the
context of our research. This lends robust support to the
reliability of the ALIGNN model in simulating point defects
with an acceptable level of accuracy , thereby reinforcing
the effectiveness of our computational approach. We note
that this approach will be inaccurate for a small subset of
defects, but such defects are generally unfavorable to be-
gin with and despite the large DFT-opt vs DFT-unopt differ-
ence, typically do not result in notably low energy defect
14 | 1–
PAGE 15
Fig. 8 (a) ALIGNN-unoptimized vs DFT -optimized Ef (q=0, EF=0) under A-rich chemical potential conditions. (b) ALIGNN-unoptimized
vs DFT -optimizedε(+2/+1) charge transition levels. All data are shown for combined datasets 1 + 2 + 3 + 4.
structures. This can also be seen from Figure 3, where the
largest differences occur for formation energies >∼ 4eV,
and should thus not affect eventual screening of low energy
defects using the "ALIGNN-unopt1 eV " criterion. A plot
between the unoptimized DFEs computed from DFT and
predicted from ALIGNN (for dataset 1) is presented in Fig.
S12. It can be seen that there is a very high correlation be-
tween the two, showing an R2 value of 0.99 and an RMSE
of 0.29 eV, meaning that the ALIGNN predictions made on
pristine/unoptimized defect structures can, at minimum,
be used as a surrogate for initial DFT energies, and suit-
able corrections can be made on top of the ALIGNN-unopt
values to get closer to the optimized values.
Looking at only the DFT-opt values, we find that 170
defects have DFE < 0 eV, with some examples including NS
in ZnS (-3.76 eV), N As in GaAs (-3.2 eV), and N Te in CdTe
(-2.64 eV). Whereas a look at the ALIGNN-unopt values
yields 351 defects with DFE < 1 eV which includes all 170
low energy defects from DFT, meaning that the suggested
upper-bound energy screening procedure should help
account for all potentially low energy defects in addition
to a few unstable defects which may be eliminated subse-
quently . On average, the computational cost for optimizing
a single-point defect in a 64-atom supercell amounts to
approximately 2500 core hours for the neutral state and
1000 core hours each for charged calculations. Running
only static, single-shot calculations on pristine structures
requires around 400 core hours in total. On the other
hand, ALIGNN-unopt predictions are made in seconds
with minimal computing expense, and it is imperative to
use these predictions as descriptors for low energy defects.
Visualizing the ALIGNN-unopt vs DFT-opt values for q
= +2, +1, -1, and -2, in Fig. S8 shows that there are
more cases where the unoptimized energy is unexpectedly
higher than the optimized energy . This may be a factor of
the charged models never encountering pristine structures,
as those are typically only utilized in neutral calculations
and training sets. The charged models are only trained
on partially optimized structures close to the ground state,
or simply the ground state defect structures, making it
such that q ̸= 0 ALIGNN predictions for pristine structures
are less reliable than the neutral state predictions, even
though the best charged models still have very low test
RMSE values.
Finally , we examine the accuracy of predicting charge
transition levels (CTLs) from ALIGNN compared to opti-
mized DFT predictions. For any possible defect, a pristine
unoptimized structure is created as described earlier and
their DFE values are predicted at E F = 0 eV for q = 0,
+2, +1, -1, and -2. Using these values, E f vs E F plots
are produced based on the lowest energies and locations
where the defect transitions from one stable charge
state to another, referred to as ε(q1/q2), are identified.
This would effectively yield ALIGNN-unopt values for
ε(+2/+1), ε(+1/0), ε(0/-1), and ε(-1/-2), which may
then be compared with corresponding DFT-opt values
available for datasets 1, 2, and 3. Fig. 8 (b) shows the
ALIGNN-unopt ε(+2/+1) plotted against the DFT-opt
ε(+2/+1), revealing substantial scatter and a lack of
overall correlation. Similar behavior is observed for other
CTLs as well, as shown in Fig. S9 . This is not surprising,
1– | 15
PAGE 16
Fig. 9 (a) ALIGNN-based gradient free defect structure optimization scheme, demonstrated for ReZn(b) and LaZn (c) in ZnO under
Zn-rich chemical potential conditions at q = 0. The depicted values in parts (b) and (c) represent the sorted predicted DFEs for each
respective defect configuration, providing a systematic overview of the energy landscape post-optimization.
and indicates that the relative stability of different charged
defects and thus their transitions are sensitive to defect ge-
ometry and would thus require some level of optimization.
Thus, we conclude that although ALIGNN-unopt Ef (EF=0)
predictions within a threshold will provide some idea
about the likelihood of formation of defects in a compound
and its possible defect tolerance and dopability , exact CTLs
will be harder to determine without optimization, which
means ALIGNN-unopt alone cannot reveal the shallow or
deep level nature of important low energy defects.
5.4 ALIGNN-based defect structure optimization
We employed our trained ALIGNN model to optimize a
crystal containing point defects using an iterative distor-
tion approach. This gradient-free optimization method
entailed subjecting the initial defective crystal structure to
a series of systematic atomic displacements. Each atom in
the crystal was displaced based on a normal distribution,
and the displacements were carefully adjusted to ensure
no overall translation of the system. The magnitude of
these displacements ranged from zero (representing no
displacement) to a maximum value specified as a user
input. The best ALIGNN models are applied to predict the
E f of all generated crystals in all 5 q states. This procedure
is iteratively repeated and the applied distortions are ad-
justed until the predicted DFE becomes as low as possible.
This approach allows the efficient exploration of the energy
landscape of the defective crystal, seeking configurations
that approach the optimal structure. Another advantage
of this gradient-free approach is that it does not rely on
explicit training for atomic forces, which significantly
increases the memory cost of GNNs at both training and
prediction time.
For a demonstration of this procedure, we pick two de-
fects in the neutral state, namely Re Zn and La Zn, both in
ZnO. The ALIGNN-based defective structure optimization
scheme is pictured in Fig. 9(a) and results of the op-
timization procedure for Re Zn and La Zn in ZnO are pre-
sented in Fig. 9(b) and (c), respectively . After apply-
ing 644 consecutive distortions on the Re Zn geometry , the
ALIGNN-predicted DFE comes down from 5.93 eV to 5.31
eV, which is very close to the DFT-optimized DFE of 5.30 eV.
16 | 1–
PAGE 17
Fig. 10 ALIGNN-optimized and DFT -optimized defect formation energy plots for two selected defects each in (a) ZnS under Zn-rich
conditions, (b) AlP under Al-rich conditions, and (c) Si under Si-rich conditions.
Fig. 11 ALIGNN-optimized and ALIGNN-unoptimized de-
fect charge transition levels plotted against corresponding DFT -
optimized values.
For LaZn, applying a total of 2407 distortions helps reduce
the ALIGNN-predicted DFE from 5.23 eV to 3.35 eV, which
is more than 1 eV higher than the DFT-optimized DFE of
2.20 eV. ALIGNN-optimization required approximately 12
minutes for ReZn and 40 minutes for LaZn using a standard
laptop to generate defect configurations and make instant
ALIGNN predictions, which is a vast improvement on the
∼ 2500 core hours each DFT-optimization would require.
Thus, this procedure will efficiently yield lower energy de-
fective structures, though an exact match with DFT may
not occur for every system. Finally , examining the lowest
energy ALIGNN and DFT structures shows remarkable sim-
ilarities between the two, as pictured in Fig. S10 . The
decision to halt the optimization depends on whether ad-
ditional iterations significantly reduce the energy . If gen-
erating more configurations does not lead to a notable de-
crease in energy , it suggests the crystal structures have at-
tained relative stability . Therefore, we suppose the opti-
mization process is satisfactorily concluded, as further iter-
ations are unlikely to result in major improvements or en-
ergy changes. For clarity on the stopping criteria, we gener-
ated and analyzed the energy of an additional 200 config-
urations while optimizing Re Zn in ZnO at q=0. Alongside
Fig. 8(a), we have included a corresponding figure in the SI
(Fig.S18) where we demonstrated that an additional 200
configurations do not significantly reduce the energy no-
tably (the model previously obtained an optimized energy
of 5.3 eV, which remains the same). Also, we note the po-
tential use of algorithms such as Monte Carlo (MC) 70, ge-
netic algorithms, and Bayesian optimization for optimizing
the defect structures. We acknowledge that MC approaches
can be an effective optimization method and can provide a
clear stopping criterion based on the acceptance ratio. To
integrate the MC approach, we need to dynamically inte-
grate our code to generate a new configuration with the
GNN model’s checkpoint (files where the model’s parame-
ters are stored), which is under development; this will be
part of ongoing and future work.
Next, we applied the same optimization scheme to 6 se-
lected defects across three compounds for different charge
states and plotted their ALIGNN-optimized E f vs EF in Fig.
1– | 17
PAGE 18
10 alongside the corresponding DFT-optimized plots. We
find that ALIGNN-optimization produces defect formation
energy plots for Co Zn and Si Zn in ZnS (II-VI semiconduc-
tor), Rhi and Bi in AlP (III-V semiconductor), and Li Si and
Ci in Si (group IV semiconductor), that match almost per-
fectly with DFT DFEs for all cases. The most stable charge
states, transition levels, and E f magnitudes are predicted
to be very similar to both ALIGNN and DFT. We note that
there is some discrepancy between the DFT and ALIGNN
formation energies of the Bii defect in AlP closer to the
conduction band region, owing to the fact that ML models
are not perfect and will tend to show larger errors in some
places than others. Such differences are typically not harm-
ful when they occur for unstable defects or in regions of the
band gap less relevant to growth conditions. The transition
level is found to be 0.34 eV away from the CBM from DFT
and 0.51 eV from the CBM from ALIGNN, but the obser-
vations are qualitatively similar, showing that the Bii will
transition from the +1 state to neutral state to a negatively
charged state with three deep levels in the band gap. Fig.
11 further shows the CTLs for a few selected defects plotted
from ALIGNN and DFT, showing both ALIGNN-unopt and
ALIGNN-opt values. It can be seen that ALIGNN optimiza-
tion brings down the DFT vs ALIGNN RMSE from 0.37 eV
to 0.17 eV, which is a very respectable CTL prediction er-
ror that is far better than previous composition-based mod-
els and also very commensurate with the DFT-experiment
RMSE of 0.21 eV established for the same chemical space.
We further selected five distinct defects in CdTe, namely
VCd,AsTe,CuCd,Cui, and TeCd and utilizing our GNN based
optimization scheme, we methodically optimized the ge-
ometry of these defects. Subsequently , we compared the
defect levels obtained from ALIGNN against those derived
from experimental data 12,26,71,72. The outcomes of this
comprehensive comparison are visually represented in Fig.
S14, and we find that all the ALIGNN-optimized defect lev-
els match very well with experimental values.
Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of GNNs
in guiding crystal structure optimization and highlight
their potential for accelerating materials discovery and
design. It should be noted that the geometry optimization
process is not very clean, and there is no clear answer on
how many distortions or atomic displacements must be
applied for a given defect, although the unoptimized vs
optimized energy visualization provides some insight into
different types of defects. It is not easy to determine when
to stop the optimization process, other than when the
GNN-predicted energy does not reduce anymore, which
does not negate the risk of local minima trapping. This
process can also get expensive when applying for hundreds
of thousands of defects, especially depending on the values
of hyperparameters such as rcut; nevertheless, they are still
meaningfully faster than complete DFT optimization.
5.5 High-throughput screening of defects
The best ALIGNN models were finally applied to predict
the E f (EF = 0 eV) of all 12,474 possible single defects and
impurities across the entire chemical space, in all 5 q states,
at A-rich chemical potential conditions. These predictions
were then used to generate E f vs E F plots for all defects
spanning the experimental band gap of the semiconductor.
To screen for potentially low energy defects, we look for Ef
becoming negative for any portion of the band gap, using a
stringent threshold of 1 eV for neutral defects and 0 eV for
charged defects. This yields a total of 1,281 defects that
are very likely to be stable based on the ALIGNN-unopt
predictions, though many more such low-energy defects
may exist once ALIGNN-optimization is performed. Table
4 contains a few examples of low-energy defects identified
by ALIGNN. Prediction of DFE by ALIGNN for all possible
12,474 defects at the A-rich chemical potential conditions
are added to the SI. This provides a great starting point
for future studies and the quick identification of n-type or
p-type dopants in any compound of interest.
Semiconductor Group Defect
AlN III-V MnN
AlP III-V Cri,B
AlAs III-V Vi,B
AlSb III-V NSb
BN III-V AlB
BP III-V VP
BAs III-V CrAs
BSb III-V CrB
CdO II-VI TiCd
CdS II-VI Mni,B
CdSe II-VI CrCd
CdTe II-VI ScCd
Table 4 Selected defects predicted to be low energy at A-rich
conditions from ALIGNN models.
6 Future Outlook
The present contribution is primarily aimed at creating
a robust framework for predicting defect structures and
energetics in semiconductors, focusing on identifying
likely defects and their impact on the properties of interest.
We utilized GNNs to advance the accurate prediction
of DFEs in various semiconductors which is vital in
semiconductor research for efficiently screening harmful
18 | 1–
PAGE 19
defects and useful dopants, and assessing low energy
defect configurations which may be found experimentally .
Although understanding defect behavior and mechanisms
is important, our paper concentrated more on refining the
predictive models rather than exploring the interpretative
aspects of defect behavior which involves understanding
of why certain defects behave the way they do and the
underlying mechanisms that govern these behaviors.
Furthermore, while it is true that defects are a
temperature-dependent phenomena, the qualitative na-
ture of the DFEs obtained from 0 K DFT calculations is
expected to remain consistent even at finite temperatures,
such as 300 K. The rationale behind this is based on the
fact that the primary contributions to DFEs at finite tem-
peratures come from vibrational free energy , which often
does not drastically alter the relative stability of different
defects. Therefore, the trends and insights obtained from 0
K calculations are likely to remain valid when extrapolated
to finite temperatures, especially in the context of screen-
ing and predicting defects across a wide range of materials.
Additionally ,EF can also be understood as the chemical
potential of electrons in a solid. It represents the energy
level at which adding or removing an electron does not
change the total energy of the system. This means that at
this specific energy , the system is at a kind of equilibrium
with respect to electron exchange. In a pure, intrinsic
semiconductor, the EF is located approximately midway
between the conduction band and the valence band, al-
though this also depends on the hole and electron effective
mass and the temperature. In doped semiconductors,
impurities introduce additional energy levels, and the
EF shifts towards the conduction band in n-type semi-
conductors (with electron majority carriers) or towards
the valence band in p-type semiconductors (with hole
majority carriers). The precise position of the EF is critical
in semiconductor physics and technology , as it influences
the behavior of electronic devices by determining how
electrons and holes are distributed across the energy bands
of the material. We emphasize that our DFT-GNN approach
helps predict DFEs as a function of EF, where the EF goes
from the PBE-computed VBM to the CBM obtained from
the experimental band gap. Our models can easily be
extended to include further shifts in the VBM or CBM as
necessary .
Finally , we make a few notes to emphasize the strength
and limitations of the present work. Recent publications
have shown that DFT computations for point defects in
solids often get stuck in high-symmetry local minima 73,74,
potentially leading to incorrect energies and defect levels.
Lower energy defect structures may be found by perform-
ing additional geometry optimization after inducing inten-
tional distortions in high-symmetry structures. We hypoth-
esize that our GNN models could accelerate the search for
such previously unknown lower energy or metastable de-
fect configurations, by enabling instant energy estimates on
hundreds of possible structures with distortions or atomic
displacements, similar to the approach in this work for
performing ALIGNN-optimization. Despite the inaccuracy
of semi-local GGA functionals in predicting the electronic
band gap and edges, predicted defect structures are ex-
pected to be highly reliable, and the predicted energetics
and defect levels would be useful for initial screening. Low
energy defect geometries and DFE values predicted from
the DFT-GNN models will serve the following purposes:
1. High-throughput screening of low energy native de-
fects, impurities/dopants, and defect complexes across
compounds of interest.
2. As input for higher-fidelity calculations, such as using
HSE06 or GW 43,46, as well as suitable band edge cor-
rections51,52 that may be applied to shift the predicted
DFE (E F = 0 eV) values for more accurate E f vs EF
plots.
3. As input for assigning experimental phases real-life
semiconductor applications, such as via linear combi-
nation analysis using simulated and measured x-ray
absorption spectra75,76.
4. As the impetus for continuous model improvement by
adding more higher accuracy data and training multi-
fidelity models, as well as expanding the model’s reach
to other semiconductor classes and defect types.
7 Conclusions
In this work, we used state-of-the-art crystal graph-based
neural networks to develop predictive models for defect
formation energies in a chemical space of zincblende
semiconductors, by learning from a substantial com-
putational dataset containing optimized and partially
optimized geometries. Three established GNN techniques,
namely CGCNN, MEGNET, and ALIGNN, are tested in
this work. The ALIGNN scheme shows the best prediction
performance and is capable of high-accuracy prediction for
native defects, impurities, complexes, and defects in alloys.
While ALIGNN predictions made on hypothetical pristine
defect structures deviate significantly from DFT-optimized
defect formation energies, we demonstrate an ALIGNN-
based defective geometry optimization approach which
1– | 19
PAGE 20
helps bridge the gap and bring down errors in predicting
charge transition levels. The ALIGNN-unoptimized pre-
dictions made for the entire chemical space of > 12,000
possible defects are released with this manuscript, along
with necessary code and training data. We believe the
DFT-GNN approach presented in this work will be highly
consequential for screening across optoelectronically ac-
tive point defects and functional dopants in technologically
important semiconductors, even being applicable to all
kinds of defect complexes. The next steps would involve
developing a package to perform ALIGNN-based defect op-
timization, expanding the models to other semiconductor
classes and higher levels of theories, and testing alternative
ML and GNN approaches for further improvement.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The supplementary material provided contains detailed de-
scriptions of the DFT data and the functioning of GNN mod-
els, along with extra figures and tables for supplementary
reference.
Acknowledgements
A.M.K. acknowledges support from the School of Materi-
als Engineering at Purdue University under account num-
ber F.10023800.05.002, as well as support from Argonne
National Laboratory under sub-contracts 21090590 and
22057223. A.M.K. also acknowledges insightful discus-
sions with Dr. Mariana Bertoni at Arizona State University ,
Dr. Prashun Gorai at Colorado School of Mines, and Dr.
Maria K.Y. Chan at Argonne National Laboratory . This re-
search used resources from the National Energy Research
Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), the Laboratory Com-
puting Resource Center (LCRC) at Argonne National Lab-
oratory , and the Rosen Center for Advanced Computing
(RCAC) clusters at Purdue University . P.G. acknowledges
IIT Madras for providing financial assistance through the
"International Immersion Experience Travel Award" to visit
Purdue University . Please note commercial software is iden-
tified to specify procedures. Such identification does not
imply a recommendation by the National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology (NIST).
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflicts of Interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Author Contributions
A.M.K. conceived and planned the research project. DFT
computations and GNN model training were performed by
M.H.R., P.G., P.M., and A.M.K.; S.K.Y., G.P., B.D., and K.C.
provided constant guidance and software support for the
project and for editing the manuscript. M.H.R. and A.M.K.
took the lead on writing and editing.
Data Availability
All DFT data and GNN predictions are included with the SI
as .csv files. All code can be found on Github 77: Link
References
1 A. M. Ganose, D. O. Scanlon, A. Walsh and R. L. Z. Hoye,
Nature Communications, 2022, 13, 4715.
2 The White House, August 2022.
3 A. M. J. Zwerver, T. Krähenmann and et al.,Nature Elec-
tronics, 2022, 5, 184–190.
4 S. Chen, A. Walsh, X.-G. Gong and S.-H. Wei, Advanced
Materials, 2013, 25, 1522–1539.
5 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, The devil is in the defects -
Nature Physics , 2023, https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41567-023-02049-9 .
6 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, J.-S. Park, A. B. F. Martinson
and M. K. Y. Chan, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
2020, 124, 16729–16738.
7 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, J.-S. Park, N. Jeon, D. H.
Cao, D. J. Gosztola, A. B. F. Martinson and M. K. Y.
Chan, Chemistry of Materials, 2019, 31, 3599–3612.
8 D. Broberg, K. Bystrom and et al, npj Computational
Materials, 2023, 9, 72.
9 J. Buckeridge, Computer Physics Communications, 2019,
244, 329–342.
10 M. E. Turiansky , A. Alkauskas, M. Engel, G. Kresse,
D. Wickramaratne, J.-X. Shen, C. E. Dreyer and C. G.
Van de Walle, Computer Physics Communications, 2021,
267, 108056.
11 M. Lannoo and J. Bourgoin, in Defect Migration and Dif-
fusion, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
1981, pp. 219–244.
12 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, X. Xiang, L. Jacoby , R. Bie-
gaj, S. T. Dunham, D. R. Gamelin and M. K. Y. Chan,
Patterns (N. Y.), 2022, 3, 100450.
13 S. Chen, J.-H. Yang, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S.-H. Wei,
Physical Review B, 2010, 81, 245204.
14 H. J. Queisser and E. E. Haller, Science, 1998, 281,
945–950.
15 Z. Liu, G. Na, F. Tian, L. Yu, J. Li and L. Zhang,InfoMat,
2020, 2, 879–904.
16 P. K. Nayak, S. Mahesh, H. J. Snaith and D. Cahen, Na-
ture Reviews Materials, 2019, 4, 269–285.
17 V. Sivathanu, T. R and T. R. Lenka, International Jour-
nal of Energy Research, 2021, 45, 10527–10537.
18 N. Kazeev and et al., npj Computational Materials, 2023,
20 | 1–
PAGE 21
9, 113.
19 P. Gorai, R. W. McKinney , N. M. Haegel, A. Zaku-
tayev and V. Stevanovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12,
3338–3347.
20 R. Schirhagl, K. Chang, M. Loretz and C. L. Degen, An-
nual Review of Physical Chemistry, 2014, 65, 83–105.
21 S. Srivastava and et al., Communications Materials ,
2023, 4, 52.
22 S. Kim, J.-S. Park, S. Hood and A. Walsh, Journal of
Materials Chemistry A, 2019, 7, 2686–2693.
23 M. H. Rahman, J. Yang, Y. Sun and A. Mannodi-
Kanakkithodi, Surfaces and Interfaces , 2023, 39,
102960.
24 P. Borlido, J. Schmidt, A. W. Huran, F. Tran, M. A. L.
Marques and S. Botti, npj Computational Materials ,
2020, 6,.
25 C. Chen, Y. Zuo, W. Ye, X. Li and S. P. Ong,Nat Comput
Sci, 2021, 1, 46–53.
26 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, M. Y. Toriyama, F. G. Sen,
M. J. Davis, R. F. Klie and M. K. Y. Chan, npj Computa-
tional Materials, 2020, 6, 39.
27 M. D. Witman, A. Goyal, T. Ogitsu, A. H. McDaniel and
S. Lany ,Nature Computational Science, 2023.
28 K. Shimizu, Y. Dou, E. F. Arguelles, T. Moriya, E. Mi-
namitani and S. Watanabe, Phys. Rev. B , 2022, 106,
054108.
29 N. C. Frey , D. Akinwande, D. Jariwala and V. B. Shenoy ,
ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13406–13417.
30 C. J. Bartel, A. Trewartha, Q. Wang, A. Dunn, A. Jain
and G. Ceder,npj Computational Materials, 2020, 6, 97.
31 V. Bapst, T. Keck, A. Grabska-Barwi ´nska, C. Donner,
E. D. Cubuk, S. S. Schoenholz, A. Obika, A. W. R. Nel-
son, T. Back, D. Hassabis and P. Kohli, Nature Physics,
2020, 16, 448–454.
32 V. Fung, J. Zhang, E. Juarez and B. G. Sumpter, npj
Computational Materials, 2021, 7, 84.
33 C. Chen and S. P. Ong, Nature Computational Science ,
2022, 2, 718–728.
34 J. Cheng, C. Zhang and L. Dong, Communications Mate-
rials, 2021, 2, 92.
35 C. W. Park, M. Kornbluth, J. Vandermause, C. Wolver-
ton, B. Kozinsky and J. P. Mailoa, npj Computational
Materials, 2021, 7, 73.
36 A. Bhattacharya, I. Timokhin, R. Chatterjee, Q. Yang
and A. Mishchenko, npj Computational Materials, 2023,
9, 101.
37 M. Kilgour, J. Rogal and M. Tuckerman, Journal
of Chemical Theory and Computation , 2023, 19,
4743–4756.
38 T. Xie and J. C. Grossman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120,
145301.
39 C. Chen, W. Ye, Y. Zuo, C. Zheng and S. P. Ong, Chem-
istry of Materials, 2019, 31, 3564–3572.
40 K. Choudhary and B. DeCost, npj Computational Mate-
rials, 2022, 8, 221.
41 H. Rahman, S. Rojsatien, M. Bertoni, M. Chan and
A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, In Preparation, 2023.
42 J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, The Journal
of Chemical Physics, 2003, 118, 8207–8215.
43 C. Vona, D. Nabok and C. Draxl, Advanced Theory and
Simulations, 2022, 5, 2100496.
44 J. L. Lyons and C. G. Van de Walle, npj Computational
Materials, 2017, 3, year.
45 T. Das, G. Di Liberto and G. Pacchioni, The Journal of
Physical Chemistry C, 2022, 126, 2184–2198.
46 C. Vona, D. Nabok and C. Draxl, Advanced Theory and
Simulations, 2022, 5, 2100496.
47 J. Pan, W. K. Metzger and S. Lany , Phys. Rev. B, 2018,
98, 054108.
48 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Modelling and Simulation in
Materials Science and Engineering, 2022, 30, 044001.
49 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi and M. K. Y. Chan, Journal of
Materials Science, 2022, 57, 10736–10754.
50 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi and M. K. Y. Chan, Energy
and Environmental Science, 2022, 15, 1930–1949.
51 M. P. Polak, R. Jacobs, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi,
M. K. Y. Chan and D. Morgan, The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 2022, 156, 114110.
52 M. Y. Toriyama, J. Qu, G. J. Snyder and P. Gorai, J.
Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 20685–20694.
53 G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B , 1996, 54,
11169–11186.
54 C. Li, J. Poplawsky , Y. Yan and S. J. Pennycook, Mater.
Sci. Semicond. Process., 2017, 65, 64–76.
55 J. D. Poplawsky , W. Guo, N. Paudel, A. Ng, K. More,
D. Leonard and Y. Yan,Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, year.
56 M. Gloeckler, I. Sankin and Z. Zhao, IEEE Journal of
Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1389–1393.
57 T. Nideep, M. Ramya and M. Kailasnath, Superlattices
and Microstructures, 2020, 141, 106477.
58 X. Yang, Y. Long, Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Zhou, S. Xie,
B. Li, J. Zhang, X. Hao, S. Karazhanov, G. Zeng and
L. Feng, Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing ,
2023, 156, 107267.
59 D. Wickramaratne, C. E. Dreyer, B. Monserrat, J.-X.
Shen, J. L. Lyons, A. Alkauskas and C. G. Van de Walle,
Applied Physics Letters, 2018, 113, 192106.
60 J. Lee and R. Asahi, Computational Materials Science ,
1– | 21
PAGE 22
2021, 190, 110314.
61 T. N. Kipf and M. Welling,Semi-Supervised Classification
with Graph Convolutional Networks , 2016, https://
arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907v4.
62 J. Zhou, G. Cui, S. Hu, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu,
L. Wang, C. Li and M. Sun, Graph Neural Networks:
A Review of Methods and Applications , 2018, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1812.08434v6.
63 Z. Chen, X. Li and J. Bruna, Supervised Community De-
tection with Line Graph Neural Networks, 2017, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1705.08415v6.
64 D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014.
65 S. Pandey , J. Qu, V. Stevanovi´c, P. St. John and P. Gorai,
Patterns, 2021, 2, 100361.
66 J. N. Law, S. Pandey , P. Gorai and P. C. St. John, JACS
Au, 2023, 3, 113–123.
67 K. Choudhary , B. DeCost, L. Major, K. Butler, J. Thiya-
galingam and F. Tavazza, Digital Discovery , 2023, 2,
346–355.
68 K. T. Schütt, H. E. Sauceda, P.-J. Kindermans,
A. Tkatchenko and K.-R. Müller, The Journal of Chem-
ical Physics, 2018, 148, 241722.
69 C. Chen and S. P. Ong, Nature Computational Science ,
2022, 2, 718–728.
70 J. E. Gentle, Computational Statistics , 2010, https:
//doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-08-044894-7.
01316-6.
71 T. Ablekim, S. K. Swain, W.-J. Yin, K. Zaunbrecher,
J. Burst, T. M. Barnes, D. Kuciauskas, S.-H. Wei and
K. G. Lynn, Scientific Reports, 2017, 7, year.
72 A. Lindström, S. Mirbt, B. Sanyal and M. Klintenberg,
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 2015, 49, 035101.
73 I. Mosquera-Lois, S. R. Kavanagh, A. Walsh and D. O.
Scanlon, npj Computational Materials, 2023, 9, year.
74 A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Nature Physics , 2023, 19,
1243–1244.
75 S. Rojsatien, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, T. Walker, T. Ni-
etzold, E. Colegrove, B. Lai, Z. Cai, M. Holt, M. K.
Chan and M. I. Bertoni, Radiation Physics and Chem-
istry, 2023, 202, 110548.
76 S. Rojsatien, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, T. Walker,
N. Mohan Kumar, T. Nietzold, E. Colegrove, D. Mao,
M. E. Stuckelberger, B. Lai, Z. Cai, M. K. Y. Chan and
M. I. Bertoni, Chemistry of Materials , 2023, 35, 9935–
9944.
77 M. H. Rahman and A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, Defect
Generation in Graph Neural Networks, 2023, https://
github.com/msehabibur/defect_GNN_gen_1,
GitHub repository .
78 K. Choudhary and B. G. Sumpter, AIP Advances, 2023,
13, year.
22 | 1–
PAGE 23
Supplemental material to "Accelerating Defect Prediction in Semiconductors Using Graph Neural Networks"
Md. Habibur Rahmana, Prince Gollapallib,c, Panayotis Manganarisa, Satyesh Kumar Yadavb, c, Ghanshyam Pilaniad, Brian
DeCoste, Kamal Choudharye, and Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodia
aSchool of Materials Engineering, Purdue University , West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; E-mail: amannodi@purdue.edu
bDepartment of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai 600036,
India
c Centre for Atomistic Modelling and Materials Design, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai, 600036,
India
dGE Research, Schenectady , NY, 12309, USA
eMaterials Measurement Laboratory , National Institute of Standards and Technology , Gaithersburg, MD, 20899, USA
*
Fig. S1 Visualization of the semiconductor-defect chemical space in terms of (a) all group IV, III-V, and II-VI semiconductors, (b) all
possible defect/impurity atoms, and (c) possible defect sites considered in the zincblende structure.
*
aamannodi@purdue.edu
PAGE 24
Fig. S2 (a) Crystal graph convolutional neural network (CGCNN) (b) Materials graph network (MEGNET) and (c) Atomsitic line graph
neural network (ALIGNN) architecture.
Table S1: Evaluation of Test RMSE across various Train-Validation-Test splits using the ALIGNN scheme, as applied
to the dataset from Figure 4
Train-Validation-Test Test RMSE (eV)
50 : 25 : 25 0.35
60 : 20 : 20 0.15
70 : 15 : 15 0.14
Table S2: Comparative analysis of validation RMSE across each cycle of the 5-fold cross-validation using the
ALIGNN scheme on the dataset from Figure 4
Cycle Validation RMSE (eV)
Cycle 1 0.18
Cycle 2 0.14
Cycle 3 0.15
Cycle 4 0.19
Cycle 5 0.13
ALIGNN Hyperparameters
The following hyperparameters were used in the ALIGNN model:
• train_ratio: 0.6 (60% of the data is used for training)
• val_ratio: 0.2 (20% of the data is used for validation)
• test_ratio: 0.2 (20% of the data is used for testing)
• epochs: 100-120 (The model is trained for 100-120 epochs)
• batch_size: 8-32 (Size of each batch of data during training)
• weight_decay: 1e-05 (Regularization parameter to prevent overfitting)
• learning_rate: 0.001 (Step size for the optimization algorithm)
• optimizer: ’adamw’ (Optimizer used for training, a variant of Adam optimizer)
| 1–
PAGE 25
Fig. S3 (a) Learning curve for a CGCNN model trained on dataset 1 under A-rich chemical potential conditions, and (b) optimization of
batch size and cut-off radius in the CGCNN model showing the validation RMSE (eV).
• cutoff: 8.0 (Cutoff distance for graph construction)
• max_neighbors: 12 (Maximum number of neighbors for each atom)
• alignn_layers: 4 (Number of ALIGNN layers)
• gcn_layers: 4 (Number of GCN layers)
• atom_input_features: 92 (Number of atom input features)
• edge_input_features: 80 (Number of edge input features)
• triplet_input_features: 40 (Number of triplet input features)
• embedding_features: 64 (Number of embedding features)
• hidden_features: 256 (Number of hidden features)
1– |
PAGE 26
Fig. S4 (a) Learning curve for an ALIGNN model trained on dataset 1 under A-rich chemical potential conditions, and (b) optimization
of batch size and cut-off radius in the ALIGNN model showing the validation RMSE (eV).
Fig. S5 Parity plots for ALIGNN models corresponding to (a) E f (q=+1, EF=0) (b) E f (q=0, EF=0) (c) E f (q=-1, EF=0), under A-rich
chemical potential conditions, prior to outlier removal.
Table S3: Recent High-Throughput DFT Defect Dataset
Unoptimized vs Optimized DFEs
Unoptimized vs Optimized DFEs
To elucidate the distinctions between unoptimized and optimized DFEs as depicted in Figure 3, we calculated
the average distance from the defect to all atoms in both optimized and unoptimized structures. This cal-
culation, termed "avg_distance_from_defect", involved aggregating the individual distances and computing their
mean by normalizing against the total atom count within each structure. Subsequently , we assessed the ’differ-
ence_in_avg_distance_from_defect’ between optimized and unoptimized configurations, revealing a pronounced dis-
crepancy for interstitial defects (mean of 0.076Å), followed by vacancies (approximately 0.0256Å), and substitutional
defects (mean of approximately 0.0252Å). The mean for each defect type was derived by summing all ’differ-
ence_in_avg_distance_from_defect’ values for that category and dividing by the corresponding total number of defects
(e.g., 70 for vacancy , 515 for substitutional, and 875 for interstitial). This disparity suggests a necessity for substantial
atomic reorganization, particularly when incorporating extra cations or anions into tetrahedral or octahedral voids. In
addition, we present a detailed analysis of the top 5 interstitial defects that underwent rigorous DFT optimization in Table
S4. We further computed the error distribution (the energy difference between optimized and unoptimized structures), as
illustrated in Fig. S11. This analysis indicates that for most defects, the error ranges from 0 to 1.2eV, signifying that the
majority of the data points conform to the observed trend.
| 1–
PAGE 27
Fig. S6 Parity plots for ALIGNN models corresponding to (a) E f (q=+2, EF=0) (b) E f (q=-2, EF=0), under A-rich chemical potential
conditions.
Study
Number of
Defects
Studied
Types of Defects Charge States
Considered
This study ∼1900 defects
Vacancies,
Substitutional,
and Interstitial
Defects
5q Charge
States
’High-throughput calculations of charged
point defect properties with semi-local density
functional theory 8’
245 defects
Vacancies,
Substitutional,
and Interstitial
Defects
5q Charge
States
’Defect graph neural networks for materials discovery in high-temperature
clean-energy applications 27’ ∼1500 defects Vacancies Neutral states
’Can a deep-learning model make fast
predictions of vacancy formation in diverse
materials? 78’
∼530 defects Vacancies Neutral states
Table S4: Detailed overview of top 5 interstitial defects subjected to rigorous DFT optimization.
This table ranks the defects based on the ’difference_in_avg_distance_from_defect’, a calculated metric representing the
change in the average distance between the defect and surrounding atoms, comparing unoptimized and optimized con-
figurations. The ranking provides insights into the extent of atomic rearrangement these defects undergo during the
optimization process.
Serial Semiconductors Defect difference_in_avg_distance_from_defect (Å) Category
1 C Hg_i 0.359 Interstitial
2 CdS Re_i 0.267 Interstitial
3 CdS O_i 0.263 Interstitial
4 CdS F_i 0.263 Interstitial
5 CdS Tc_i 0.260 Interstitial
1– |
PAGE 28
Table S5: RMSE between Optimized and Unoptimized Configurations for Different Types of Defects
Defect type RMSE (eV)
Vacancy 0.48
Interstitial 2.96
Substitutional 2.48
Table S6: Analysis of Test RMSE Variation During the Augmentation Process
This table details the integration of Dataset 1 with Datasets 2, 3, and 4, and the corresponding test RMSE (Root Mean
Square Error) variations.
Models Only Dataset 1
RMSE (eV)
Overall
RMSE (eV)
Dataset 1 0.15 0.15
Dataset 1 + Dataset 2 0.17 0.29
Dataset 1 + Dataset 2 + Dataset 3 0.16 0.31
Dataset 1 + Dataset 2 + Dataset 3 + Dataset 4 0.18 0.32
Table S7: Coefficient of Determination (R2) for Figure 5(a-c)
This table presents the coefficient of determination (R2) values for Figure 5(a-c) across both case (i) and case (ii) scenarios.
Figure R2 Values
Figure 5(a) (I) R2 = 0.38 (II) R2 = 0.97
Figure 5(b) (I) R2 = 0.00 (II) R2 = 0.90
Figure 5(c) (I) R2 = 0.53 (II) R2 = 0.99
Analysis of Dataset Distributions
The inner box plot within a violin plot provides a concise summary of the dataset’s distribution. It visually represents the
quartiles and the median. The median is indicated by a line inside the box, marking the 50th percentile of the data. The
edges of the box display the first (25th percentile) and third (75th percentile) quartiles, together defining the interquartile
range (IQR). Extending from the box, whiskers illustrate the range of the data, typically reaching up to 1.5 times the
IQR from the quartiles. Data points lying beyond the whiskers are often considered outliers and are usually plotted as
individual points, helping to identify extremes in the data distribution. The 95% Confidence Interval (CI) for the median
provides a range within which we can be 95% confident that the true median of the entire population from which the
sample was drawn falls. This is a way of expressing uncertainty about the estimated value (median) considering the
variability and size of sample data.
Dataset 1
• Whisker Low: −2.40eV
• Whisker High: 12.21eV
• IQR: 3.65eV
• 95%CI for the Median: 4.42eV to 4.62eV
Dataset 2
• Whisker Low: −1.49eV
• Whisker High: 9.06eV
• IQR: 2.64eV
• 95%CI for the Median: 3.64eV to 3.73eV
| 1–
PAGE 29
Dataset 3
• Whisker Low: −1.55eV
• Whisker High: 7.46eV
• IQR: 2.25eV
• 95%CI for the Median: 2.45eV to 2.79eV
Dataset 4
• Whisker Low: −5.40eV
• Whisker High: 11.55eV
• IQR: 4.24eV
• 95%CI for the Median: 0.16eV to 1.75eV
The KDE bandwidth for Dataset 1, as calculated using seaborn’s (Python module we used for plotting the violin plot)
default method, is approximately 1.05 × 10−5 eV, which is very small due to the scale of the data in the dataset, and it
indicates a very smooth kernel density estimate.
1– |
PAGE 30
Fig. S7 Parity plots for ALIGNN models corresponding to (a) Ef (q=+2, EF=0), (b) E f (q=+1, EF=0), (c) E f (q=0, EF=0), (d) E f (q=-1,
EF=0), (e) E f (q=-2, EF=0), under B-rich chemical potential conditions.
| 1–
PAGE 31
Fig. S8 ALIGNN-unoptimized vs DFT -optimized (a) Ef (q=+2, EF=0), (b) E f (q=+1, EF=0), (c) E f (q=-1, EF=0), and (d) E f (q=-2, EF=0),
under A-rich chemical potential conditions.
Fig. S9 ALIGNN-unoptimized vs DFT -optimized (a)ε(+1/0), (b) ε(0/-1), and (c) ε(-1/-2) charge transition levels.
1– |
PAGE 32
Fig. S10 Atomic structure snapshot of ReZn in ZnO, (a) after full DFT optimization, and (b) after ALIGNN optimization. Atomic structure
snapshot of LaZn in ZnO (c) after full DFT optimization, and (d) after ALIGNN optimization. Grey, red, black, and blue depict Zn, O, Re,
and La, respectively.
Fig. S11 Distribution of errors, represented as the energy difference between optimized and unoptimized structures, for defects
in dataset 1. The visualization provides a comprehensive view of how closely the optimized structures align with their unoptimized
counterparts in terms of energy, highlighting the range and frequency of deviations observed across the defects.
| 1–
PAGE 33
Fig. S12 Parity plot comparing DFT unoptimized and ALIGNN unoptimized energies for dataset 1 at charge state q=0.
Fig. S13 Parity plot comparing DFT and ALIGNN prediction (Test data) considering different defect types such as vacancy, substitutional,
and interstitial defect.
1– |
PAGE 34
Fig. S14 Comparing experimental and ALIGNN defect levels for selected defects in CdTe, showing reasonable agreement.
Fig. S15 Comparing DFT DFEs based on 2 × 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 × 3 supercell for selected defects in CdTe atq = 0 charge state.
| 1–
PAGE 35
Fig. S16 Comparing DFT and ALIGNN DFEs based on 3 × 3 × 3 supercell for selected defects in CdTe atq = 0 charge state.
Fig. S17 Parity plot comparing DFT and ALIGNN prediction considering dataset 1 at q=0 without sampling the intermediate structures.
1– |
PAGE 36
Fig. S18 Supplementary Fig. to Fig. 8(a): confirmation that the inclusion of an additional 200 configurations does not result in
significant energy reduction. We observe that at the 644th iteration, the Defect Formation Energy (DFE) is approximately 5.30 eV.
Similarly, after 844 iterations, the DFE remains at around 5.30 eV, despite indications of a decreasing energy trend as we used sorted
energy values to represent the energy landscape. Note that this plot shows the energy sorted from worst to best.
| 1–